so continuing on we now need to write
our reader class our reader or consumer
class
so let's go ahead and do that its going to be....
....and we need
a private message object...
....
and then we need to create our run method....we are going to be doing
something very similar to what we did in
the write object or writer object the
run method up above but instead we're
going to be just reading the message and
just printing it out and then we still
going to delay for a random period of
time
so do....
....
....and we're
gonna wait for the message to say that its
finished to be received so.....and
this finished here has to be identical
to the finish that with defined their so
make sure you get the case
sensitivity identical to avoid any weird
errors and then latest message...so that is our for loop
and we're going to print out the latest
message
we're going to pause for that period of
time that i mentioned....
....so after
two seconds we're going to sleep for two
parentheses to close it off and we need
to catch the exception which is going to
be the same exception as per the writer
class which will be the interrupted
exception and for now we won't do any
coding in there and we're not returning
anything so that is the end of the
method so as you can see we're looping
through the messages received
we're looking for the last message which
is finished and when the processing each
message
printing it out to the console then
waiting randomly up to 2
seconds depending on what the random
instance returns it will be up to two
seconds and then exiting once we
printed out all the messages
so now we need to add the code to create
and run these threads going to do this
from our main method at the top and
incidentally you might find that
when you type this in that IntelliJ
will add imports for java.io.reader
and java.io.writer because of these
classes that were created so they have
been added up here in the import section
make sure you remove those imports
otherwise you'll get compiler errors ok
so i'm going to now create that code
that's going to be message.....and then we're
going to put.....to start it we're
going to do the same for the reader
class as well
....
......so let's run this now
and just see what happens
remember that we've got delays built
into this you can see that it does seem to
be a problem
and this does depend on the timing but
it is very likely when you run it you get
a situation like this on my computer
when you won't see all the messages and
the application appears to have hung so we
need to terminate it now because clearly
two seconds has elapsed and we've only
got that very first message
so I'm going to click on the stop button
to stop the process the process is now
finished as you can see and I'll closed
down the run window
so looking at this one well look we
synchronized obviously the read method
and also the write method in our message
class
so what's actually going on if you think
about it
hopefully become pretty obvious as to
what the problem is
and in fact you might have spotted the
error while I was writing the code and
the problem is that - once one of the
threads starts looping the other one
can't change the value of empty because
the thread is blocked
remember that only one synchronized
method can run at a time so the thread
that's looping is holding the lock for
the message object and the other one is
blocked
waiting for the other thread to release
the lock now this is what is know or what's
called a deadlock and we're going to
look at this situation in more detail in
a later part of this section of the
course so we absolutely did need to
synchronize both methods
so how do we actually get around this
problem well this is where the wait
the notify and notify all methods
come into play so when a thread calls
the wait method it will suspend
execution and release whatever locks
it's holding until another thread issues
a notification that something important
has happened
so you can probably guess that the other
thread issues the notification by
calling the notify or notify all methods
i'm going to call the wait method
inside the message classes read and
write methods now we'll also have each
thread called notify all
after its change the value of the empty
variable so let's go ahead and do that
so we'll go back to our loop here in
message and you can see while empty so
so what we want to do here is in this
first loop this while empty for our read
method in our message class
we need to introduce a try then we're
going to call the wait method as i
mentioned and we're needing a try block
because we're calling thread code and it
catches or we need to catch the
interrupted exception so that's for the
read and also for the write
we need to do exactly the same thing
going to try then within their we're
going to call wait
we're going to catch the exception like
so
but there is one other thing we need to
do and that is call the notify
method well notify all in this case
after we've exited the while loop so down
here for the read method
....and
after we've set the field to a
message in the write method we're going
to call notify all so that should be it
now but before we test it let's just go through and discuss a few
things about this code
first of all we're still looping now you
might be wondering why do we have to
loop
why not use an if statement and if that
fails call wait
well the answer is that we always want
to call weight within a for loop that's
testing for whatever condition we're
waiting on because when a thread is
notified to wake up
there's no guarantee that it's being
woken up because the condition is
waiting on has changed so it's possible
the operating system has woken it up
for another reason
or it could have woken up because wait
through and interrupted exception so we
always want to call wait within a loop
so that when it returns because there's
been a notification of some sort
we'll go back to the beginning of the
loop we check whatever condition we're
interested in
and then we call wait again if the
condition hasn't changed
so in other words never assume that a
thread has been woken up because the
condition that it's waiting on has
changed now the next thing here is you
probably noticed i called notify all
so why are we calling notify all rather
than notify well because we can't notify
a specific thread and that's because the
notify thread doesn't accept any
parameters
it's conventional to use notify all
unless we're dealing with a situation
when there are you know a significant
number of threads that all perform a
similar task waiting for a lock
so in that case we don't want to wake up
every thread because when there's a lot
of them that could result in a huge
performance here so we call notify so
that only one thread is woken up since
all the threads are waiting to do a
similar task
whichever thread is woken up should be
able to proceed
so now that we've implemented or made
changes to our code to use wait and notify
all
let's run our application and see what
happens and this was the error that i was
talking about earlier
sometimes IntelliJ will add
this extra import for some reason so you
just need to delete that to avoid the
compilation errors and it's got to do
with the fact that were using the class
names writer and reader
let's just run that again
and their you go you can see that we've got
four messages printed and the codes
working fine
you also saw that there was a round
about a two-second delay or up to a two-second
delay between each message
so each thread now waits and releases
its lock on the message object when the
loop condition passes and that gives the
other thread the opportunity to run so
it can now process a message and change
the value of the empty variable when it
calls the notify all method the thread
that's waiting can now proceed
so the two threads go back and forth
like this until all the messages have
been printed
so before we move on to the next video
let's briefly touch on two more points
firstly when synchronizing code
always keep in mind that threads can be
suspended while executing a single line
of code
so a single line of code may will call a
method that contains hundreds of lines
of code or a single line of code can
contain many operations and a thread can
be suspended before or after each
operation
so in the count down example you saw that
the parameter we passed to the println
method contains two method calls and
three concatenation operations as we saw
a thread can be suspended before or
after performing any of these operations
and also while executing the println
method itself so having said that
there's a few atomic operations in Java
that happen all at once a thread can't
be suspended in the middle of doing them
here are the atomic operations in Java
reading writing reference variables for
example the statement
my object 1 equals my object 2 would be
atomic so with thread can't be
suspended in the middle of executing
that statement also a thread can't be
suspended
if reading and writing primitive
variables except those of type long and
double
so the jvm may require 2 operations to
read the writew long and doubles and a
thread can be suspended between each
operation for example a thread can't be
suspended in the middle of executing my
int equals 10
but it can be suspended in the middle of
executing my double equals 1.
2 3 4 from argument sake and the
third scenario was reading writing all
variables declared volatile but we will be
looking at volatile variables in a
future video in this section
now the second point I want to make is
that in relation to the collection
classes some collections aren't thread safe
in other words they're not synchronized
for example array list is not thread-safe
when we read the documentation which I will put up on the screen in a second we see
that states that the implementations not
synchronized what that means is if we're
using an array list in our application
and multiple threads can access that at
the same time then we have to be
responsible for synchronizing the code
that uses the array list alternatively
after creating the array list we can call
collections.synchronize list
the method and pass it to the array list
so we still have to synchronize
iterating over the list though so for more
information you can check the
documentation at this link which will
also be in the resources section you can
find out more about that very
interesting read here talking about
synchronization in the collections
classes on Oracle's
documentation and out of interest on the
other hand the vector class is
synchronized so if we use the vector
class in our application we wouldn't
have to worry about multiple threads
accessing the vector object at the same
time
so in other words the java developers
have synchronized the vector code so
that its thread-safe so that's all for
synchronization
I hope you got a lot out of that in the
next lecture we're going to take a look
at classes in the java.util..
concurrent package see you in the
next video